Hey everyone, I'm Chris Crow, campus pastor for Crossway Christian Church's Millford campus here in Southern New Hampshire, where our mission is all about practicing the way of Jesus together as we pursue God, build community, and unleash compassion.
I pray that what you hear today will help you experience God more deeply and live more and more like Jesus.
We're going to continue our series experiencing Psalm 23 together.
How many people from the pond?
Would you raise your hand?
Thank you for being here.
Let's give them a hand if you're from Milford.
Give them a hand.
Thank you for being here.
It's great to be together as a church family, one church.
We have some of our brothers and sisters downtown, actually, worshiping.
And so great to have the pond here with us.
My name is Chris, and I'm going to open God's word with you.
And so I wanted to go to Psalm 6 to begin with.
And so I was looking forward to being here this morning.
I don't know if you're, were you looking forward to coming to church?
Anybody looking forward to coming to church, right?
Five of you.
Okay.
Well, there's a problem with that.
And so I was just excited to come to church and I'm very excited most every Sunday, been in ministry over 30 years.
And there are some Sundays I was not so excited to go to church for whatever reason, internal battles, external struggles, whatever they may be.
But
So far so good here at Crossway.
And so I was yesterday looking forward to going to church.
And when I was being drawn to the Lord, now you're going back a few years, my teenage years, I was invited to go to a Christian church.
I was from a tradition that was very religious, but didn't have a relationship with Jesus personally.
And so I was invited to go to church by a fellow student in high school.
And I said to them, do you have any good looking girls there?
And they said, we do.
And I said, OK, I'll go.
And so I went, but I started to hear the gospel.
But every week I would wait for Brad to pick me up in his green hondo cord.
And I'd be looking out my bedroom window.
And again, I was very religious.
So I had statues of Jesus in my bedroom, and I would kiss the head of Jesus often.
I didn't know him personally, but God was drawing me to himself.
I would one day confess Jesus as the Lord and Savior of my life at 19.
But before that, very religious.
I remember kissing the head of Jesus for one reason or another.
I was going through some anxiety and things like that.
And I accidentally hit Jesus and knocked him off the shelf, the windowsill, and his head fell off.
And so his head is on the ground decapitated.
I'm like, what?
Jesus, what did I do to you?
Now this is a young mind trying to figure out the things of God.
And so I put his head back on and I glued it.
And so I went on until one day, Jesus himself, not a statue, but Jesus himself,
would call me to himself and say, I want you to be a follower of mine.
And I was just so excited to go to church all the time.
And I don't wanna ever lose that excitement.
And I pray that as you get into God's word with me, that your excitement would only grow for the love of Christ.
Jesus alone, didn't we just sing that?
Jesus alone, do you love Jesus?
How about you men in the house?
Do you love Jesus?
Right, where's the men?
Lift up your hand, men.
Do you love Jesus Christ with all of your heart, soul, mind, and strength?
Right?
We do.
And we can say that courageously and confidently.
Here's what David said in Psalm 6.
Again, we'll get back into Psalm 23.
And I want to look at verse 6 and finish that wonderful, wonderful Psalm 23.
But I would just draw into Psalm 6.
Notice what David says.
Here, oh Lord, verse 1, rebuke me not in your anger, nor discipline me in your wrath.
Be gracious to me, O Lord, for I am languishing.
Now I'm in the ESV version, and so your version might be a little bit different.
I'm gonna read out of the ESV and preach out of it.
Heal me, David said, O Lord, for my bones are what?
Troubled.
My bones are troubled.
Notice the transparency.
Notice the vulnerability.
Notice how this man is just laying it all out there for us to be able to see into his world.
Verse three, my soul also is greatly troubled.
But you, O Lord, how long?
Have you ever asked the Lord, how long?
Anybody with me on that one?
You've gone through something, you're going through something, maybe it's a valley, a pit, something that you're in right now and you don't feel like it's ever gonna end or you're gonna be delivered from it.
And David says, how long?
Verse four, turn, oh Lord, deliver my life.
Save me for the sake of your steadfast love.
For in death there is no remembrance of you.
In Shio, who will give you praise?
And then he says in verse six, I am weary with my moaning.
I am weary with my moaning.
Every night I flood my bed with tears.
I drenched my couch with my weeping.
This is a man that's going through a whole lot.
And I dare to venture to say that there are some men and women in this room and watching online who are going through a whole lot.
And you can say my heart is troubled.
Even my soul is troubled.
And it's to you that I want to preach, not that the others who are not going through anything, right now,
I would bypass, but I want to speak into your life the Word of God so that you can have encouragement and hope this morning.
Are you ready?
Okay, sit up straight, right?
Get the posture right.
And we're going to get into Psalm 23 and one verse, verse six.
And here's the verse.
And I want to read it out loud.
Ready?
Out loud together.
Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life.
And I shall dwell in the house of the Lord temporarily.
I've titled the seventh message, how to come out of your valley.
How to come out of your valley.
Okay, I'm going to get real a bit bold here.
How many people would say that you have been in a valley recently or are in a valley of some sort?
Raise your hand.
many, many, many, many hands.
David says, surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life, and I shall dwell in the house of the Lord.
How do you come out of your valley?
How do you do that?
Well, David mentions valleys all throughout scripture.
He mentions the shadow of death, which would probably be the darkest of all valleys, the shadow of death, verse 4 of Psalm 23, valleys in the Bible, not only are topographical and geographical, but they're also spiritual.
There's meaning inside of the valleys.
The valley of dry bones.
Do you remember that valley in the book of Ezekiel and the nation of God?
It was a vision that Ezekiel had gotten for the nation of Israel to come back alive spiritually.
Very important valley.
How about the valley of Elah?
Do you remember what happened in the valley of Elah?
That was where David defeated who?
Over nine foot tall.
Guess who what his name was, right?
The valley of Elah.
How about the valley of Eschkal?
What happened there?
Well, that was where the spies were looking into the promised land.
And there were two that came back and said, we can take the promised land.
Do you remember who those two were?
Joshua and Caleb and the other were saying that we're like grasshoppers and there are giants in the land.
How about the Valley of Jezreel?
That's where King Saul was defeated.
Valley is not only a topographical and geographical, they're spiritual in nature.
There are things that God wants to accomplish in and through
But let me just say it like this to begin with as a way of introduction.
All valleys lead to some form of victory.
All valleys, and so those hands that went up, there's victory that's coming to you not only in your valley, but as you exit your valley and to what God has after that experience for you.
So hold on to hope.
Don't dread.
Don't fear.
Certainly don't wander away.
and don't give up.
This is going to be a word for you.
I pray it's an encouraging word.
This place of pain is preparation for what's next.
You'll see on the screen a man who's one of my heroes.
He went to heaven.
He went to be with the Lord many, many years ago.
His name's Chuck Smith.
Have you seen the movie Jesus Revolution?
It's a phenomenal movie.
I've seen it I think five times.
I don't watch movies usually that many times, but this is the story of a man that loved Jesus.
He was called into the ministry.
In fact, it wasn't until he was about 40 years old that a hippie named Lonnie Frisbee shows up into his life.
Now, before that, there were many valleys in Chuck Smith's life, many ministries that didn't bear fruit.
In fact, there was a time period in Chuck Smith's life where he decided that he was going to give up ministry and just get away from the church.
He didn't want anything to do with it anymore.
He was going through valleys, but he hung in there and he just wanted to be faithful to Jesus.
And this hippie shows up in 1966.
And if you've seen the movie, if you know some of the history of the Jesus movement or the Calvary Chapel movement, you'll know that from there, thousands upon thousands of people then get born again, churches are planted all around the world.
There's about a thousand or so Calvary chapels around the world.
But you would have never known that if you watched the movie and you're thinking, wow, you know, he did struggle, you know, chapel, Costa Mesa.
But you don't know some of the story before that.
See, I don't know some of the story that you're going through.
Some of you I'm looking at you right now.
I don't really know who you are.
You're visiting from the pond.
I've never met you.
There are some from our own campus that we're just having new people all the time.
And I really don't know you.
I don't know your story.
I don't know what's happened to you and what you've gone through or what you're going through.
Chuck Smith came out of the valley.
And let me say this, I'm not implying that you won't enter another valley the rest of your life.
Because they're going to be part of our life as long as we're on this side of heaven.
But how do you exit out of your valley?
I want you to know that it's not temporary, it's only going to be first season.
David said this, though I walk what?
Through the valley of the shadow of death.
You're not supposed to set up camp there.
You're not supposed to permanently live there.
It's not your permanent residence to be in the valley.
In fact, if you wanted to go to Derry, New Hampshire, I found this.
No kidding.
There's a RV and camp park.
I think I have a logo up there.
Bring that up there if you would.
It's called Hidden Valley.
Look at that RV and golf park.
And there are some people who think, you know what?
That's going to be the rest of my life.
And I'm going to say to you that you need to get behind the wheel of your RV, turn it on, and start moving out of there.
You're not going to stay there in your Hidden Valley the rest of your life.
You're meant to come out of the valley.
David knew that.
I'm going to show you some of these things that he had learned in and through his valley experience.
Now, if you want to take notes, there's going to be two principles here, application principles.
And so we're going to get into God's word.
And I need you to take your Bible and really follow along.
And we've got to move quick because we have a second service.
And we've got people that are going to converge on this campus here.
And we'd want everything out in the parking lot to go well.
And so nobody getting old road rage at
you know, cross-way mill for trying to find your way out of this parking lot.
But there are some verses of Scripture.
I need you to see.
So get your Bibles ready.
We're going to turn pretty quickly.
Here's principle number one.
This is what I see that David learned on how to get out of your valley.
Remember the providences of the Lord.
Number one, remember the providences of the Lord.
He says this, surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life.
How was it that David was able to say this?
Why did he say that?
Let's ask the texts and questions.
Remember, valleys aren't permanent places of residence, but temporary places meant to test us.
But also you're going to face some temptation in those valleys as well.
Are you going to be faithful in and through all of those temptations?
It's going to reveal the deeper things of God and to refine your character.
That's the purpose of some of these valleys that we go through.
But there's something else that I want you to remember, and that is the providences of the Lord.
Now, what are providences?
What are providences?
These are times in your valley where you have seen God show up.
Maybe God glimpses.
Maybe God gives you a revelation.
He says to you, I'm going to take care of you.
You have nothing to worry about.
I am coming on your behalf to take care of what needs to be taken care of in your life.
The providences, the verse says, surely goodness in mercy shall follow him.
You could actually change that word surely.
And the more literal rendering of that word would be only.
David says only goodness in mercy.
What confidence he has in the character and the commitment of God towards him.
This is what's going on as he says this word right here.
He says that God sees to my life.
This is literally what he's talking about.
God sees to it.
Now if I went up to you and I said, man, I really need to do something for me and you said something like this.
I'll see to it.
This is Almighty God who's saying to us his providences is that he's saying to you in your valley, I'm going to see to it.
Does that make any sense?
That's a word you're going to need to know in the middle of your valley that God is fully capable and sovereign and loving and he's also providential.
Meaning he's saying to you, I am gonna see to it that every need that you could ever have in the middle of your valley is going to be taken care of.
Remember the providences of the Lord.
This is how you get out of your valley.
You're gonna go back in your mind and you're gonna see God showed up there, God showed up there, God showed up over here.
This is what David does.
That's why he can say with confidence surely or only goodness and mercy, shall follow me all the days of my life.
Are you that confident?
Are you that sure, as David was?
God goes to work on our behalf.
It's a wonderful, wonderful theological truth.
Let me just give you a little bit of a history lesson about a man named Roger Williams.
You'll see him on the screen.
I don't know if you've ever been to Providence, Rhode Island.
It's a great city.
They can't drive down in Providence.
I just have to say that.
If you've ever gone to Rhode Island, you're thinking, man, these people had not gone to Driver's Ed.
They must have failed that class.
because they cannot drive.
Other than that, it's a pretty cool city.
But way back, way back, let's go back to Roger Williams and part of the Massachusetts Bay Colony.
And so at that time, the Church of England was ruling over the church, the people that had come over from England.
And so Roger Williams was a rebel.
He was a rule breaker.
There's rule followers and there's rule breakers.
How many people are rule follower?
We'll pray for you.
You gotta be a rule breaker.
Not a law breaker,
but a rule breaker like Roger Williams.
So he goes up against the Church of England, Massachusetts Bay Colony kicks them out.
So he's traveling, he's trying to find land for a new settlement.
So you'll see the map there, if you could bring that map up there, watch the map.
I mean, they were sailing from Salem, Mass, if you've ever been to Salem, and they're coming down, and they go up with his Narragansett Bay, is where is that now?
And so they go right to the tip top of Narragansett Bay, and there's this
track of land that they believed, Roger Williams believed that God provided.
God saw to it that Roger Williams would find a new track of land.
And so when they found that new track of land, Roger Williams called it Providence.
Providence, why?
Because God's invisible hand took care of everything that needed to be taken care of so that they could find a new home and then establish what would become Providence, Rhode Island.
He does the same thing for you.
Whatever valley, you gotta remember the providences of the Lord.
Let me show you the word providence, you'll see it on the screen there.
I want you to find a word that's within the word providence.
What do you see there?
What is the word within the word, do you see it?
What is it?
It's provide, right?
I'm gonna break that up just a little bit here.
And the word pro or forward or behalf of
and then Vide or Vide, Latin, and that would mean to see forward.
And really the idea here is that God sees ahead so that he will sustain you for whatever need you may have.
He will provide for you.
So David knows that in his valley, God was providentially providing everything that he would need.
So as he comes out of his valley, he does so by remembering the providences of the Lord.
Let me show you an illustration of this.
And I told you we're going to turn in our Bibles.
Go to Genesis.
Genesis is the last book of our Bible, right?
Genesis.
Just making sure you're paying attention.
First book of the Bible.
Genesis 22.
You remember Abraham and Isaac, that story.
Abraham and I say, chapter 22, I just want to look at a few verses.
I'm going to highlight some things to illustrate this first principle that we see in David's life on how to come out of our valley.
And when you get to Genesis chapter 22, would you say a nice, hearty amen?
Okay.
And after these things, verse one, after these things, God tested Abraham and said to him, Abraham,
And he said, here I am.
And he said, take your son, your only son Isaac, whom you love, and go to the land of Moriah and offer him there as a burnt offering as one of the mountains of which I shall tell you.
OK, now if you just had a son, a daughter, and God speaks to you and says, I want you to go offer up your son or daughter.
How many people would have a few thoughts running through your mind?
Right?
Especially if you're newborn.
Well, here's I, Abraham, he gets a word from the Lord, he's supposed to offer up his son.
You see, there's a lot of white spaces in the Bible.
In other words, in between the words.
Now, we got to be careful how we insert truth in there and understand it.
We take it out of the context.
We expos it.
We exegete.
We exit out of the text, the meaning that's in the text.
That's the approach that we should take as we study scripture.
You don't want to do isegesis where you read into it.
You kind of place it into the text.
A lot of false teachers would do something like that.
So, but what you need to look at, there's white spaces in there and Abraham is a real man.
He's a real man with real feelings, real struggles, real valleys, real temptations.
And so God speaks to him to test him.
You're going to offer up your son.
This is a very difficult moment for Abraham.
So verse three, it says, so Abraham rose early in the morning.
Can you imagine that morning you get up, you wipe the sand out of your eyes, pull the water on your face, today's the day I'm gonna kill my son.
How's that gonna go, God?
What's gonna happen here?
He saddled his donkey and took two of his young men with him and his son Isaac and he cut the wood of the burnt offering and rose and went to the place of which God told him.
And on the third day, Abraham lifted up his eyes and saw the place from afar.
Then Abraham said to his young men, stay here with the donkey, I and the boy will go over there and worship and come again to you.
I mean, there's faith operating right there.
He already believes that God's gonna providentially supply all that he would need so that he'd be able to come back with his son alive.
It's amazing.
Verse six, Abraham took the wood and the burn offering laid in on Isaac, his son, and he took in his hand the fire and the knife so they both went of, they both
They went both of them together, and Isaac said to his father, Abraham, my father, and he said, here I am, my son.
And he said, behold, the fire and the wood, but where's the lamb for the burnt offering?
And Abraham said, God will what?
There it is.
Okay, here we go, the providence of the Lord.
God will provide for himself the lamb for a burnt offering, my son, so they went both of them together.
And when they came to the place in which God told them, Abraham built the altar,
And there laid the wood in order and bound Isaac his son and laid him on the altar on top of the wood.
And then Abraham reached out his hand and took the knife to slaughter his son.
But the angel of the Lord called him from heaven and said, Abraham, Abraham.
And he said, here I am.
And he said, do not lay your hand on the boy or do anything to him.
For now I know that you fear God, seeing you have not withheld your son, your only son from me.
And Abraham lifted up his eyes and looked and behold, behind him was a ram caught in the thicket by his horns.
And Abraham went and took the ram and offered it up as a burnt offering instead of his son.
And so Abraham called the name of that place, the Lord will what provide.
And he said, and it is said to this day, on the Mount of the Lord, it shall be provided.
Watch this, this is beautiful.
Not only do we see the providence of the Lord here, but we also see a preview of what event in human history that's coming hundreds
and even thousands of years into the future.
What event is that?
It's the cross of Christ.
It's Jesus.
Now watch this because some of you are still in your sins.
And what I mean by that, and I don't mean offensively.
I don't mean to offend you.
I'm just gonna say to you, you do not know God.
You are separated from God.
You don't have a relationship with God through Christ.
You haven't repented of your sins and put your full faith in the fact that he died on the cross for your sins.
so that he will then come in by his spirit and wash you clean and give you a brand new start.
Forgive you of all of your sins so that you'll be reconciled back to God because you are separated from him since birth.
I want you to look at a mountain because you're in the valley of the shadow of death.
And so I want you to look out past the valley and I want you to look at a mountain called Calvary.
I want you to look at a mountain where Jesus died on that cross so that you yourself will be provided, the ram, the lamb in the thicket.
That is your sacrifice.
That is the one who died for your sins and who rose again.
Do you know him?
Have you had that relationship with God restored through Christ?
I'm saying to you, if you're gonna remember any of the providences of the Lord,
This would be number one, that you would remember that Jesus died for you, that Jesus gave his life, that Jesus suffered there, that he spilt his blood so that you could be forgiven fully and completely for all of your sins, and you can know God.
Remember the providences of the Lord.
You'll come out of your valley.
Do this in remembrance
of me, Jesus said, right?
Do this in remembrance of me.
Charles Spurgeon said this, it's a wonderful, wonderful quote.
You'll see it on the screen.
He's talking about David here.
And he says, goodness and mercy, follow him always.
The black days as well as the bright days.
The dreary days of winter as well as the bright days of summer.
I love that.
I don't know if you know Charles Spurgeon.
Charles Spurgeon was a tremendous Christian, great preacher, went through a whole lot of valleys in his life, died at, I think, 57.
Pretty young.
He was preaching one day in Surrey Gardens and there were thousands of people there and somebody said, fire, fire.
And they all started to scatter the crowd.
And then about seven or eight people got trampled to death and died.
Charles Spurgeon was never the same again after that.
He would battle depression or melancholy.
He would go through a lot of valleys as a result of many, many things.
But that one event they said, he would burst out into tears.
And then he would say, I don't know why I'm crying.
Probably connected to the valleys that he went through.
He looks at David's life here.
And there'll be times, and that quote right there, the Black Days,
How do you deal with the black days in your valley?
And for those who raised their hand, how do you do that?
Simply remember the providences.
This is how you do it.
I'm telling you, this is how you do it.
This is how you come out.
This is how you get the victory out of your valley.
Let me look at number two with you.
Return to the promises of the Lord.
return to the promises of the Lord.
David said this, and I shall dwell in the house of the Lord forever.
David's valley.
I believe that he knew that one day he would return.
Remember, he was on the run for 20 years from King Saul.
You talk about valley after valley after valley.
And David knew that one day he'd come back.
This is what I want to encourage you with.
This is where you know where you're at presently won't be
where you'll always be permanently.
Can I just repeat that?
You know where you're at presently, won't be where you'll always be at permanently.
You'll return to the place that you once were, but you won't be the same person.
Your valley would have changed you.
David says, I shall.
Don't miss those two words.
I shall.
This is speaking about time in the future.
David's speaking like this, often in the Psalms, if you'll go through the texts of scripture called the Psalms in which he wrote, he said this in 1715, as for me, I shall behold your face in righteousness when I awake, I shall be satisfied as with your likeness.
Can we say I shall in the valley?
I shall dwell in the house.
David says it's a promise that God had given him over and over and over again.
Now this could literally be a return to the place of God's presence in the temple.
That's very likely if you read the Psalms that he's talking about.
I'm going to come back to church one day.
Do you know how many people through the years have wandered away from church?
Maybe it's you and you've been outside of the church for a long time.
Well, God is calling you out of your valley to come back to the house of the Lord, and you're here.
Hallelujah for that.
It's amazing thing.
Well, David's going through that.
He's on the run from Saul.
A lot of valleys.
He's looking, I shout, dwell in the house of the Lord.
It could be literally the temple.
It could be spiritually and figuratively.
He could be talking about heaven.
I think it's all of that, to be honest with you.
There comes a time in your valley that you need to know that you're going to return again, that you're going to make a comeback.
I remember saying that to the Lord often in the valleys that we have gone through.
And I said to the Lord, this is like a quote, Lord, I'm going to come back.
I'm going to make a comeback.
Now that's not in my own strength.
That's not in my own wisdom.
That's in the grace of the Lord.
But He's going to put inside of you, I shall return.
I shall return."
Can you say?
I shall, like David.
We have to return to the promises of the Lord.
Can I go back to Psalms with you?
Go to Psalm 26, and let me just highlight a couple of things, and I'll bring it to a close.
Psalm 26.
David says, vindicate me, O Lord, verse 1.
vindicate me, O Lord, for I have walked in my integrity, and I have trusted in the Lord without wavering.
Prove me, O Lord, and try me.
Test my heart and my mind.
For your steadfast love is before my eyes, and I walk in your faithfulness.
I do not sit with men of falsehood, nor do I consort with hypocrites.
I hate the assembly of evildoers, and I will not sit with the wicked.
I wash my hands in innocence and go around your altar, O Lord, proclaiming thanksgiving aloud and telling all your wondrous deeds."
And then he says in verse 8, O Lord, I love the habitation of your house.
Notice it.
And the place where your glory dwells.
Is he talking about heaven there?
Yeah, I think in some way.
But I also think he's talking about the house of the Lord.
Literally, the house, the place where his glory dwells.
the assembling of the people of God.
Chapter 27, the Lord is my light, he says, in my salvation, whom shall I fear?
The Lord is the stronghold of my life of whom shall I be afraid.
And when evil doers assail me to eat up my flesh, my adversaries and foes, it is they who stumble and fall.
Though an army in camp against me, my heart shall not fear, though war rise against me, yet I will be confident.
One thing I've asked of the Lord, and that while I seek after, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, and to gaze upon the beauty of the Lord and to inquire in His temple.
David, he experienced God in the valley, probably more powerfully than outside of the valley, and that's what would be true of us as well.
He does use the word forever, or eternity,
He understands He'll be with God for all eternity.
And we get that.
But we're going to need the promises of God in our present to be able to make it outside of our valley.
Return to the promises of the Lord.
You've got to know that He is in covenant relationship with you.
In fact, He is committed to the covenant relationship to you.
There's nothing that can break that covenant.
There's nothing that you have done in your past or even in your present that is so bad
and so evil that it can break the covenant promise that he has, the commitment that he has to you as his child.
Nothing can sever that.
Ever, ever.
This covenant promise of God to his people is something that we need to return to.
I'm not going to look at these for sake of time, but Isaiah 35, if you want to write this down on your notes, 35,
of Isaiah, 1 to 10, and chapter 51 of Isaiah, 1 to 11 are some great verses that talk about returning, the people of God returning based on the promises of God.
Let me conclude.
I'll have you look at chapter 30 of Psalms, chapters 30.
Look at verse one.
David says, I'll extol you, O Lord, for you have drawn me up and have not let my foes rejoice over me.
Hallelujah.
Oh Lord, my God, I cried to you for help, and you have healed me.
Oh Lord, you have brought up my soul from Shiel.
You restored me to life from among those who go down to the pit.
Sing praises to the Lord, O you, his saints, and give thanks to his holy name, down to verse 11.
You have turned for me my morning into what?
Oh, you say I can't dance very well, that's okay.
Because God's gonna make you a dancer.
This is what he does.
Enclothes me with gladness, David goes on, verse 12, that my glory may sing your praise and not be silent.
Oh Lord my God, I will give thanks to you forever.
One more.
Go to Psalm 84, verse 5, 84.
Move it to verse 5 to 10.
Blessed are those who strength is in you, in whose heart are the highways to Zion.
As they go through the valley of Baca, they make it a place of springs.
The early rain also covers it with pools, and they go from strength to strength, each one appears before God and Zion.
O Lord God of hosts, hear my prayer, give ear, O God of Jacob, behold our shield, O God, look on the face of your anointed, for a day in your courts,
is better than a thousand elsewhere.
And I would rather be a doorkeeper in the house of my God than dwell in the tents of wickedness.
Return to the promises of the Lord.
I'm going to close with an illustration.
It's about a man named William Cooper.
William Cooper, talk about valleys.
Now this is going to be a word that's going to be specific for someone in here because you're struggling with depression.
So listen close.
There are valleys, numerous, a myriad of valleys that we can go through.
But there's going to be one that I just want to highlight right now in the life of William Cooper.
For those who might be here listening or watching online at a future date, battling with depression, not going to ask for a hand raise.
This is between you and the Lord on this one.
Ready?
William Cooper understood valleys.
He never got married.
He did fall in love and that love never, never materialized.
It was a heartbreaking event in his world.
So much so that it sent him into what they would call back in those days, a melancholy.
We would call that depression.
From there, his valleys only get worse to the point where he's institutionalized for insanity.
That's what they would call it back in the 1600s.
He got himself whole or healed through a man named John Newton.
John Newton wrote to him, does anybody know?
Amazing grace.
So William Cooper understood valleys.
His whole life he never married, got completely slandered.
because of his bachelorhood.
Can you imagine what happens today when people are saying such cruel things about people?
That happened back in those days too.
And he was the recipient of all of that that led him into a life of one valley after another valley until the day that he died.
He writes, he's a poem writer.
He wrote hymns.
Here's one that has meant the world to me
in the middle of the valleys that I have gone through.
It's called God works in mysterious ways.
Are you ready?
He said this.
God moves in mysterious ways, his wonders to perform.
He plants his footsteps in the sea and rides upon the storm.
Deep in unsearchable minds of never failing skill, he treasures up his bright designs
and works his sovereign will.
Judge not the Lord by feeble sense, but trust him for his grace.
Behind a frowning providence, he hides a smiling face.
His purposes will ripen fast, unfolding every hour.
The bud may have a bitter taste, but sweet will be the flower.
Blind unbelief is sure to air,
and scan his work in vain, for God is his own interpreter and he will make it plain in his own time, in his own way.
Father, we pray that you would help us to be the kind of people that realize that you will always provide.
You see ahead and then you meet every single need in the valley and out of the valley.
We will remember your providences, Lord, and we will return to your promises, as William Cooper did, over and over and over again.
I pray, Lord, for my brothers and sisters sitting here, especially those who raised their hand, testifying publicly in front of others that there is a valley they had gone through or are going through.
And so, God, I know that you're speaking to them, that you're going to lead them out of their valley.
And so, Lord, we trust you.
We even sing praises.
We will dance before you, Lord.
You turn our morning into dancing.
This is what you do.
And so, Lord, we just say we love you.
Thank you for speaking your truth to us this morning.
I pray, Lord, for those in depression, specifically, that they would hear a word from you right now, that you're ever present with them, that you're seeing to their life.
You're seeing to it.
To take care of it, may this truth go deep inside of their soul, even now, that you would bring them out.
Remove the clouds of melancholy, as they would say back in the old days, the days of gloom, the dreary days of winter.
I pray God and we pray that it becomes the bright days of summer for them.
In Jesus' mighty name, amen.
Thanks for listening to the Crossway Christian Church's Middleford campus sermon podcast.
If you like to plug into the life of our community or have any questions that we might be able to answer, visit our website at CrosswayCC.org to connect with us.
Until next time, we can be with you.
May the Lord bless you and keep you.